## Eke (ಏಕೆ) - A proposal for transcribing Kannada

This proposal attempts to address the slight divergence in informal
writing for kannada (kannaDa) that is already in use in various channels
on the internet. It is a slight variation of the Harvard Kyoto
protocol(HK) adapted to kannaDa.

For lack of a better term, there's already an informal scheme in use to
transcribe kannaDa. Let's call it IK (informal kannaDa). Eke walks a
line between IK and HK.

The default sans serif fonts on wikitext may cause ambiguity between
**l** (small el) and **I**(capital Ay). There are quite a few other
fonts that avoid this ambiguity.

## akSaras (abugidAs) vs alphabets

Brahmic scripts dating back to the oldest archealogical sources are used
as aksharas (akSaras in EK terminology akSharas in formal kannaDa) or
abugidas as linguists often refer to them.

Kharoshti has been linked to Phoenician origin but the links between
Brahmi to Phoenician are disputed by certain scholars.

IAST and other alphabets have been used to represent brahmic scripts.
Other than HK, most other use diacritics quite heavily - mostly for
generality and precision.

## Use in computation

Diacritics makes it harder to type and use on regular english keyboards
although unicode has made it increasingly easier to render text. Word
processors, Spreadsheets are more usable wrt unicode than programming
focused environments. Non-english scripts are also less prevalent in
programming languages and scripting tools. Lack of full unicode support
in programming editors, command lines make them harder to use.

## ellara kannaDa

"Ellara Kannada" (ellara kannaDa / EK) is a proposal aimed at reducing
the gap between spoken and written Kannada language. This was proposed
by the eminent linguist and padmaSri award winner D.N.Shankara Bhat
(D.N.Sankara BhaT). Some features of EK include eschewing the use of
mahaprANas (ottuli or breathed consonants) and emphasize usage and
construction of native kannaDa words. It uses the orthography of ಹೊಸಬರಹ
instead of ಕನ್ನಡ.

## ಹೊಸಬರಹ

The gist of ಹೊಸಬರಹ is to address the disconnect in how common people
speak and (mostly can’t) read/write Kannada. Note that EK's a holistic
approach to using native kannaDa words, inventing new words using
kannaDa native constructs, using a native kannaDa grammar which does not
rely on external techniques like Sanskrit along with the orthography of
ಹೊಸಬರಹ. We use EK interchangably with ಹೊಸಬರಹ in the remaining portion of
the article.

For otthaksharas, 35x35 consonant symbols are reduced to 21x21 symbols.
These would be combined with the following 10 vowels and 3 modifiers
instead of 16 vowels and 5 modifiers.

Complexity reduction is from 35x35x21 ≈ 25725 to 21x21x13 ≈ 5733
symbols. Its about a 77% reduction in symbols, greatly simplifying
reading/writing without any loss of fidelity for pronunciation in
Kannada (but not classical or Vedic Sanskrit).

Aspiration (mahapraana) from phonology perspective is the same as ಹ
otthu.

So ಕ ಖ ಗ ಘ = ಕ ಕ್ಹ ಗ ಗ್ಹ

Since aspiration is not used in common speech in Kannada (unlike Hindi
and Sanskrit), ಕ ಗ would suffice.

Simplifications like those drop 25 “ordered”consonants into 13 ಕಗ ಚಜ ಟಡಣ
ತದನ ಪಬಮ This would eliminate the following ಖಘಙ ಛಝಞ ಠಢ ಥಧ ಫಭ

ಙ ಞ ಣ ನ ಮ with nasalization/non standalone are represented by anusvara
ಂ. The first 2 don’t occur in standalone form in Kannada. So ಮಂಗ, ಗಂಜಿ,
ಗಂಟೆ, ತಂದೆ, ಪಂಪ are the five variants.

“unordered” would simplify to ಯರಲವಶಸಹಳ Eliminating ಱೞಷ which are not
used.

Coming to vowels ಅಆಇಈಉಊಎಏಒಓ are retained.

ಋೠಌೡಐಔಅಃ are not. See
<https://www.bolochant.com/blog/sanskrit-pronunciation> for correct
pronunciation of these in Sanskrit. It’s not important/relevant in
Kannada.

ಐಔ (diphthongs) need special mention. In Sanskrit only ai, ou occurs
frequently, hence the special symbols. In Kannada ಆಯ್, ಎಯ್, ಏಯ್, ಓಯ್ etc are
common. It’s more uniform to use ಅಯ್ than ಐ, ಅವ್ than ಔ.

It's similar to why Sanskrit has क्षत्रज्ञ are special characters but
unnecessary as symbols in Kannada and formed by ಕ್ಷತ್ರಜ್ಞ. In hosabaraha,
ಕ್ಶ, ತ್ರ, ಗ್ನ್ಯ or ಜ್ನ್ಯ or ಗ್ಯ (depending on pronunciation).

Modifiers ್ಂ are retained. ಃ ೱ are not. ಼ is debatable. It’s useful for
indicating foreign languages like English, Hindi and Sanskrit- like fa,
za, bank, odd etc.

## Terminology

## Background phonics, linguistics

## Differences between kannaDa and samskxta

## Cultural perspective

This is mostly cultural commentary that can be open ended. Languages are
a contentious topic in India - like elsewhere.

The diversity of languages, history of various invasions, colonization,
the partition of India, linguistic organization of states, urbanization
and recent trend towards assertion of the Indian way of thinking (and
along with supremacist tendencies of language and religion) has created
a potpourri of opinions.

The commonly held viewpoint on languages often differs completely from
the academic consensus. On the flip side, there are traditions in
linguistic understanding that are more a couple of thousand years old,
the most impactful being pAnini and the schools of study of pANinian
grammar.

Although there is value in these traditions, we should also be mindful
of the fact that grammars of kannaDa and other DraviDian languages were
written by people who held that all non-samskxta languages were
apabramhSAs (or corrupted speech). In the drive for standardization, non
PIE language families have been studied with the same scheme that
applied by pANini for samskxrta.

It's only with the advent of modern linguistics, etymology and phylogeny
that alternates have emerged. Although there's been many that are not
mentioned here, AK rAmAnujan's attempts to write a generative grammar
for kannaDa and the recent exhaustive work of Sankara BaT in writing a
grammar for kannaDa from first principles which have resulted in a
grammar which doesn't follow the same template of Samskxrta.

## A guide to writing in EK

## Goals and Non goals

Eke prioritizes ellara kannaDa over formal kannaDa given its simplicity
and implicit appeal to ease of use. Eke doesn't have the same goals as
HK. HK aims to faithfully retain the original spelling in devanAgari
i.e. the original spelling in devaNagari can be reconstructed from text
in HK.

Eke also does not attempt to solve the spelling problems of English.
Although there are several attempts to do so like Arpabet, wiki
pronunciation for English there's no clear consensus. IPA is quite
complete but complex to learn and the extensive use of diacritics makes
it difficult to use on standard desktop and phone keyboards.

Attempting to unify Indic pronunciations and English is quite tricky. No
attempt will be made to synthesize them.

Although ellara kannaDa achieves a 77% complexity reduction from
35x35x21 ≈ 25725 to 21x21x13 ≈ 5733 symbols, its still a significant
number of symbols to learn. Eliminating ottakSaras could achieve a
further reduction to 21x13 ≈ 273 symbols.

This simplification is automatically obtained in usage of an alphabet
set (without diacritics). There is a reduction in precision in certain
cases. Eke, like HK goes down this line with only slight modifications.

Eke will use 31 symbols for all of ellara kannaDa, 41 symbols for formal
kannada including historical symbols and 44 to incorporate english f, w,
z.

When Eke is used with ellara kannaDa (ek) simplifications, the term
"Eke(ek)" will be used.

If it is a direct transliteration from any text, without any
alterations, the term "Eke" is used.

## Consonants
[sections/Eke_consants.md](https://github.com/vwulf/ettuge/blob/master/src/main/md/kannada/sections/Eke_Consonants.md)

## Consonants of ellara kannaDa in Eke
[sections/Eke_Consonants_Table.md](https://github.com/vwulf/ettuge/blob/master/src/main/md/kannada/sections/Eke_Consonants_Table.md)

## Additional consonants in formal or legacy kannaDa in Eke
[sections/Eke_Consonants_Table_Extended.md](https://github.com/vwulf/ettuge/blob/master/src/main/md/kannada/sections/Eke_Consonants_Table_Extended.md)



## Vowels

### All vowels
[sections/Eke_Vowels.md](https://github.com/vwulf/ettuge/blob/master/src/main/md/kannada/sections/Eke_Vowels.md)

## Eke from English/Latin alphabet to kannaDa
[sections/Eke_EnglishAlphToKannadaAks.md](https://github.com/vwulf/ettuge/blob/master/src/main/md/kannada/sections/Eke_EnglishAlphToKannadaAks.md)

## Eke from English/Latin alphabet combinations to kannaDa
[sections/Eke_EnglishCombAlphToKannadaAks.md](https://github.com/vwulf/ettuge/blob/master/src/main/md/kannada/sections/Eke_EnglishAlphCombToKannadaAks.md)

## diphthongs
[sections/Eke_Diphthongs.md](https://github.com/vwulf/ettuge/blob/master/src/main/md/kannada/sections/Eke_Diphthongs.md)

## ellara kannaDada akSaragaLu
[sections/Eke_akSaragaLu.md](https://github.com/vwulf/ettuge/blob/master/src/main/md/kannada/sections/Eke_aksaragaLu.md)

## Remaining/Formal kannaDa akSaras / uLida akSaragaLu
[sections/Eke_formal_akSaragalu.md](https://github.com/vwulf/ettuge/blob/master/src/main/md/kannada/sections/Eke_formal_akSaragaLu.md)

## Character distributions

Character distributions of words in Alar.

### Raw

Raw dsitributions of the kannaDa akSaras in the Alar dictionary can be found here:
[Kannada_distributions.md](https://github.com/vwulf/ettuge/blob/master/src/main/md/kannada/sections/Kannada_distributions.md)

It includes consonants, vowels (as full characters), modifiers(or half charactoers, most of the vowels) and consonants as modifiers (ottakSaras). 

### Eke consonants

Below table has the ottulis merged into kiridulis since ottulis are
represented by an additional h. ottakSaras also map to the underlying
consonant representation reflecting the real spread of consonants.

Frequency tables are listed for EK representations only. As expected
ottulis fall below every EK consonant in the frequency distribution of
characters in words found in the alar dictionary.

[sections/Eke_char_distributions_consonants.md
](https://github.com/vwulf/ettuge/blob/master/src/main/md/kannada/sections/Eke_char_distributions_consonants.md)

### Eke vowels
[sections/Eke_char_distributions_vowels.md](https://github.com/vwulf/ettuge/blob/master/src/main/md/kannada/sections/Eke_char_distributions_vowels.md)

# ellara kannaDa ottakSaragaLu

About 365 of 1296 possible ottakSaras are actually used in a
comprehensive dictionary like Alar. Even there less than a 100 of them
have \>100 counts. About 4 symbols of formal kannaDa map to 1 symbol of
EK - which transliterates to a 2 letter combination in Eke.

Since each of the following combine with with all vowels and modifiers
(10 vowels + 1 anusvAra in EK, 16 vowels + 1 anusVara, 1 visarga + 2
other legacy combinators in kannaDa), its a large sample space indeed.
So only the ottaksharas are provided here. The ್ is omitted without loss
of generality for the kannaDa and EK akSaras.

About 12% of the consonants, and 6% of the total characters are
ottakSaras totalling to around 60k occurences. We speculate (without
concrete evidence) that about 26-27k out of 60k occurences in words
indicate native origin while the remaining indicate that they are
borrowed from samskxuta or elsewhere. Outside of these, words with
ottulis are almost always borrowed.

kannaDa tends to have the same consonant repeated in ottakSaras. Most
other combinations are from samskxta, persian or hindi.

When there are no aspirated vowels, they could still be borrowed (like
jana, dina) but presence of retroflex consonants (N, L, Z) or vowels (o
O, e E) that are distinguished in dravidian languages indicate native
origin. Presence of x (ಋ) is almost certain to be of samskxta origin.

There are cases where many words in samskxta are of draviDian origin,
typically agricultural and food crop related and/or words with retroflex
consonants. These are noted in references. Some of these words are
reborrowed into kannaDa from other languages. E.g. phala, khurci, gOdi,
pulAv, biriyAni, cash(from kAsu). Other borrowings from draviDian
languages are not commonly used in kannaDa e.g. chAval, brinjAl.

Also dictionaries are built out of scholarly discretion and may contain
more formal content than everyday speech. Character and word occurrence
in dictionaries are not indicative of actual usage.


## kannaDa ottakSaragaLu distributions
The following table contains a comprehensive distribution of all ottakSara combinations that are found in the alar dictionary.

[ottakSaras_stats.md
](https://github.com/vwulf/ettuge/blob/master/src/main/md/kannada/sections/ottakSara_stats.md)

## Top 100 ottakSaras
#

The below table has character counts for ottakSaras that occur 100 or more times in alar.
The table also shows mapping from formal to ek ottaksaras and its counts as well.

[sections/Eke_ottakSaras_100_or_more.md](https://github.com/vwulf/ettuge/blob/master/src/main/md/kannada/sections/Eke_ottakSaras_100_or_more.md)

The below table summarizes the spread of ottakSaras in kannaDa and EK.
The top 100/1296 account for an overwhelming 91% of all ottakSaras in
kannaDa. The top 100/441 account for 94% of all ottakSaras.

Given that ottakSaras form 6% of the total characters (12% of the
consonants), we can see why obscure combinations and sparseness of the
permutations between characters can cause a large number of symbols
which are only rarely encountered. Using Eke automatically obviates the
need to recognize an entire parallel scheme of characters. As long as
ottakSaras are used, the following spread of frequencies will make it
hard to simplify them.

Doubled characters form about 38% of ottakSaras. Using kannaDa native
words or the process of tadBavization of foreign words can also simplify
these permutations but not eliminate the need for learning 2 symbol sets
for consonants.

|         |        |        |        |        |        |
|---------|--------|--------|--------|--------|--------|
| Top x   | 100    | 50     | 25     | 10     | 5      |
| kannaDa | 90.84% | 76.89% | 57.11% | 34.64% | 21.99% |
| EK      | 94.07% | 82.06% | 61.50% | 35.84% | 21.99% |

## Examples

### From some commmon Indian sources
[Eke_Examples.md](https://github.com/vwulf/ettuge/blob/master/src/main/md/kannada/sections/Eke_examples.md)

### From English
[Eke_Examples_English.md](https://github.com/vwulf/ettuge/blob/master/src/main/md/kannada/sections/Eke_examples_English.md)

### Using Notebook LLM
[Eke_Examples_notebook.md](https://github.com/vwulf/ettuge/blob/master/src/main/md/kannada/sections/Eke_examples_notebook.md)


### References
[References.md](https://github.com/vwulf/ettuge/blob/master/src/main/md/kannada/sections/References.md)


## Consonant Clusters

The following tables can be used to transliterate from Kannada to Brahmi
to Devanagiri to Eke to grantha as appropriate.

Further the Eke(ek) and "ellara kannaDa" section allows for the
simplifications suggested by "ellara kannada" itself. It can be applied
to most dravidian languages without loss of precision.

### Consonant cluster combinations
TBD
### Consontant Vowel combinations
TBD

## English
TBD
