## ellara kannaDa ottakSaragaLu

About 365 of 1296 possible ottakSaras are actually used in a
comprehensive dictionary like Alar. Even there less than a 100 of them
have \>100 counts. About 4 symbols of formal kannaDa map to 1 symbol of
EK - which transliterates to a 2 letter combination in Eke.

Since each of the following combine with with all vowels and modifiers
(10 vowels + 1 anusvAra in EK, 16 vowels + 1 anusVara, 1 visarga + 2
other legacy combinators in kannaDa), its a large sample space indeed.
So only the ottaksharas are provided here. The ್ is omitted without loss
of generality for the kannaDa and EK akSaras.

About 12% of the consonants, and 6% of the total characters are
ottakSaras totalling to around 60k occurences. We speculate (without
concrete evidence) that about 26-27k out of 60k occurences in words
indicate native origin while the remaining indicate that they are
borrowed from samskxuta or elsewhere. Outside of these, words with
ottulis are almost always borrowed.

kannaDa tends to have the same consonant repeated in ottakSaras. Most
other combinations are from samskxta, persian or hindi.

When there are no aspirated vowels, they could still be borrowed (like
jana, dina) but presence of retroflex consonants (N, L, Z) or vowels (o
O, e E) that are distinguished in dravidian languages indicate native
origin. Presence of x (ಋ) is almost certain to be of samskxta origin.

There are cases where many words in samskxta are of draviDian origin,
typically agricultural and food crop related and/or words with retroflex
consonants. These are noted in references. Some of these words are
reborrowed into kannaDa from other languages. E.g. phala, khurci, gOdi,
pulAv, biriyAni, cash(from kAsu). Other borrowings from draviDian
languages are not commonly used in kannaDa e.g. chAval, brinjAl.

Also dictionaries are built out of scholarly discretion and may contain
more formal content than everyday speech. Character and word occurrence
in dictionaries are not indicative of actual usage.


